[Music]
good morning and welcome to breakfast
with louise minchin and dan walker
our headlines for you today stay at home
that's the message
across the uk as england and scotland go
back into lockdown
our hospitals are under more pressure
from covid
than at any time since the start of the
pandemic with most of the country
already under extreme measures it's
clear
that we need to do more all schools will
close for most pupils just a day after
the prime minister urged parents of
primary children to send them back to
the classroom
boris johnson says he aims to have the
most vulnerable in
england vaccinated by the middle of
february
with every jab that goes into our arms
we are tilting the odds against kovid
and in favor of the british people
give us more support or more companies
will collapse and more jobs will go
unions and bossy unions and business
groups call for urgent
extra lockdown help from governments in
england and scotland
good morning elite sport in england can
continue but golf courses tennis courts
and all indoor facilities such as gyms
will have to close under the new
restrictions
good morning it's another cool day ahead
for many of us though it will be dry
however there are a few wintry showers
in the forecast and still some rain in
the southeast
and the channel islands i'll have all
the details in about 10 minutes
good morning to you um it's tuesday the
5th the 5th of january our top story for
you
england is back in lockdown this morning
for at least the next
seven weeks with people being told once
again to stay
at home the new restrictions which
include the closures of schools and
colleges came into effect at midnight
scotland has also imposed a lockdown
which means all
four nations now have similar
restrictions the prime ministers warned
the weeks ahead
would be the hardest yet our political
correspondent jessica parker has the
details
since the pandemic began last year the
whole united kingdom has been
engaged in a great national effort to
fight covid
the stay-at-home message so familiar
from back in march
is again being strongly invoked across
the uk
last night boris johnson said that
hospitals were under more pressure now
from covid
than at any point in the pandemic on the
new rules for england he urged people to
follow them right away
although they won't become law until the
early hours of tomorrow morning
the government is once again instructing
you to stay at home
you may only leave home for limited
reasons permitted in law
such as to shop for essentials to work
if you
absolutely cannot work from home to
exercise
to seek medical assistance such as
getting a coveted test
or to escape domestic abuse
in england you can meet one other person
outside but only to exercise
and any outdoor exercise should be
limited to once a day
the extremely clinically vulnerable have
been asked to shield again
good morning everybody on how long the
lockdown could last
the government's goal is to vaccinate
enough people by mid-february
to then subsequently reopen schools
after the half term
and potentially start moving areas down
the tiering system
but this timetable is an aim not a
certainty
vaccine must be rolled out at speed
we need this to be mission critical we
were the first country to get the
vaccine and we need to be
the first country to have the vaccine
program rolled out
so it's that spirit of march stay at
home
lockdowns were already in place in wales
and northern ireland
ones coming into force across mainland
scotland today
with schools closed to most children
they'll have to learn
remotely it would have been far better
if we'd approached
in england the uh the management of
schools opening and closing
in the way that scotland has done well
there's been none of this will they
won't they will they listen to the
evidence
when will schools be closed everyone
knew that schools were going to be
closed
but this constant brinkmanship of how
long do you have to go is terrible
it's terrible for teachers it's terrible
for parents and it's not that nice for
children either while there is new hope
because of the vaccine the weeks ahead
spell a new test of endurance as well
it may be a familiar more simple message
but it's not necessarily one
that's easy to hear jessica parker bbc
news
let's go live to westminster now and
speak to our political correspondent
nick erdley who
is outside number 10 morning to you nick
um thanks for being with us this morning
i think the announcement last night will
have come as a surprise to to many of
our viewers to millions of people all
across the uk
give us an idea if you can of what
caused that sudden change
morning dan i mean i think we got a hint
from the prime minister
at the weekend that there were more
restrictions coming in england clearly
things moved really quickly yesterday
though because
it was only yesterday morning we were
talking about the government saying
schools were safe and that people
should still go to school and the prime
minister saying any new restrictions
would be announced as he put it in due
course a couple of things happened
yesterday firstly in there on a
conference call boris johnson and all
the
leaders from across the uk were told by
the chief medical officers
that there was a real risk that if
things didn't change
the nhs could be overwhelmed that's why
the covert alert level went up to its
highest level yesterday
to five boris johnson also got some new
figures yesterday saying that
in one day at the end of december 80 000
people across the uk
had tested positive for coronavirus but
look there was huge
political pressure as well throughout
the day yesterday
starting on breakfast there were a lot
of people tori grandes
labour politicians first ministers
across the uk like nicola sturgeon
saying we really need to act now this is
critical
and something needs to change and
yesterday afternoon boris johnson agreed
and that's why
england is back in this really severe
lockdown
nick thank you very much for that and uh
throughout the day today we'll be
speaking to we've got all sorts of
guests lined up haven't we politicians
experts uh medics we'd love to hear from
you as well but and we'll be speaking to
uh sir david the leader of the liberal
democrats we've got michael gove here at
30. nicholas sturgeon's going to be here
at 8 30 and also speaking for the leader
of the labour party so kia starmer i
think he's called past seven this
morning
yeah absolutely and of course there are
so many changes so we'll try and keep
you right up to date
with what exactly has changed overnight
and kind of guide you and us through it
as well
so that's reaction from westminster we
just heard from nick but how do people
across
england feel about once again being told
to stay at home
john mcmanus has been finding out
monday night in york a place previously
in tier three
but where cases of the virus are rising
as winter tightens its grip
as the prime minister announced a
further english lockdown on tv
the frustration on the face of this gym
owner was easy to see
this news has broken me a little bit
um i like to think i'm a strong
resilient piss and i pride myself on
that
but i'm going home now wondering what
other things i can do to make sure my
bills paid
it's a double blow for frankie as a
self-employed businesswoman
she's not eligible for the furlough
scheme
meanwhile hundreds of miles away devon
has one of the lowest rates of infection
in england
but nowhere in the county can escape
lockdown i think the whole country needs
to be treated the same really
it's probably just easier for the whole
country to go into lockdown
and then see the whole rates decline and
then we can
start again after that i had it back in
march
and you know when i had it obviously
getting it down here was was very rare
and i wouldn't wish on anybody so i
think whatever it takes to protect who
we need to protect
it's worth it just a few days ago the
people of hull were hoping they might
move down a tear
those hopes now dashed and university
students here and across the country
have also been told they won't be
returning to campus just
yet gutted um i'm a uni student and so
sort of feels
a little bit sort of let down boris
didn't talk about universities um
but yeah just gutted to us it feels like
we've sort of not gone anywhere in um
in 10 months work now obviously well the
key workers obviously we can still work
and things like that but like
we both live in our run and like
obviously we can't see our family and
friends like it is a bit lonely
especially when we live in our
across england the outlook is
challenging with only the vaccine
rollout
offering a glimmer of hope john mcmanus
bbc news
police have arrested a scottish mp after
she apologized for using public
transport while
infected with coronavirus margaret
ferrier has been charged with
culpable and reckless conduct but
travelling from glasgow to london
in september while awaiting the results
of a covid test and then making the
return train journey having tested
positive
she was suspended by the snp at
westminster but has refused to resign
from parliament donald trump and joe
biden have both been campaigning in the
u.s state of georgia this is before
today's crucial vote for two senate
seats more than 3 million people have
already cast ballots nearly 40 percent
of the state's
registered voters if the democrats win
they'll they will control
all of congress and the white house our
washington correspondent nomia iqbal
reports
the men standing with joe biden might
just be his most
important friends right now democrats
pastor rafael warnock and investigative
journalist jon ossoff
are running for georgia's two senate
seats if they win
the president-elect party will control
the senate
one state one state
can chart the course not just for the
next four years
but for the next generation for people
in georgia this means
campaigning has never stopped place that
we demand better is at the ballot box
the energy here in georgia is is
something i've never seen before
yes we can do it yes we can
all right now if john ossoff wins he'll
be the youngest
senator a title that once belonged to
joe biden
the pressure is on georgia's republicans
too kelly lafleur here
meeting voters and we're in the battle
for the country
so fellow candidate david purdue has had
to quarantine for a few days
make sure that you get your friends and
family out this is about turnout we're
going to win
if we turn out the early voter turnout
in georgia has been huge
and that's because this state knows that
their candidates will decide just how
powerful
joe biden's presidency will be her
pro-business pro-conservative values
have really trickled down
to our city as mayor what i'm telling
people is go out there and vote
georgia is the final battle for
president trump
he still wrongly believes the election
was rigged there's no way we lost
georgia there's no way
that was a rigged election some
republicans worry he could put off
voters giving an advantage to joe biden
nomia rick bell bbc news georgia
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news